README.md, before:

# Guide to BS-seq Bioinformatics Workflow
## Zaitlen ALS Project Fall 2017 
## author: <christa.caggiano@ucsf.edu> 

### Whole Genome Bisulfite Sequencing (WGBS) Analysis 
------
Pipeline to process raw WGBS here is based on the WGBS pipeline from the ENCODE consortium, [found on github](https://github.com/ENCODE-DCC/dna-me-pipeline/blob/master/HAIB/bismark_pipeline/bismark_pipeline_main.sh) 

My implementation of this pipeline can be found [here](https://github.com/christacaggiano/ENCODE_WGBS) and uses the following steps: 

0. Check quality of raw fastq files with fastqc 
1. Remove adapters and trim reads
2. Align to hg38 using Bowtie2  
3. Find methylated and unmethylated sites using Bismark methylation extraction  

Output files: 
    	* aligned bams 
    	* methylation reports (command, summary of run)  
    	89* methylation extraction txt files --- used for rest of analyses

### post-analysis of WGBS data
------  

1. Pool any replicates 
2. Sort files 
3. Collapse all observations of a given CpG site 
4. For each CpG site present, calculate percent methylation, i.e. number of methylated observations/total observations

### reference datasets 
------

#### methylation chip datasets

| GEO accession | Study         | File link  | Tissue(s)  |
|---------------|---------------|------------|------------|
| [GSE40279](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE40279)| [Hannum et al (2012)](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/pubmed/23177740)| [series_matrix](https://goo.gl/CaGDpK)| whole blood|
| [GSE40360](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE40360)   | [Huynh et al (2014)](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/pubmed/24270187)| [series_matrix](https://goo.gl/vbjtji) | frontal lobe white matter|
| [GSE48472](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE48472) | [Slieker et al (2013)](https://epigeneticsandchromatin.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1756-8935-6-26#Bib1)| [series_matrix](https://goo.gl/pP4Zoc)  | various tissues| 
| [GSE62727](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE62727) | [Zhou et al (2017)](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/pubmed/28849195)| [series_matrix](https://goo.gl/ZbBykZ)  | left atrium| 
| [GSE53162](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE53162) | [Ladd-Acosta et al (2014)](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/pubmed/23999529)| [series_matrix](https://goo.gl/PJX2BB)  | prefrontal cortex| 

#### wgbs and rrbs datasets 

| Study         | File link  | Data type  | Tissue(s) | 
|---------------|------------|------------|-----------|
| [Roadmap Epigenetics Consortium (2015)](www.nature.com/nature/journal/v518/n7539/full/nature14248.html)| [Fractional methylation](http://egg2.wustl.edu/roadmap/data/byDataType/dnamethylation/RRBS/FractionalMethylation.tar.gz), [File key](http://egg2.wustl.edu/roadmap/data/byDataType/dnamethylation/RRBS/EG.mnemonics.name.xls) | RRBS | various |
| [Roadmap Epigenetics Consortium (2015)](www.nature.com/nature/journal/v518/n7539/full/nature14248.html)| [Fractional methylation](http://egg2.wustl.edu/roadmap/data/byDataType/dnamethylation/WGBS/FractionalMethylation.tar.gz), [File key](http://egg2.wustl.edu/roadmap/data/byDataType/dnamethylation/WGBS/EG.mnemonics.name.xls) | WGBS | various | 
| [Jensen et al (2015)](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-015-0645-x)| [Raw fastq files](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=phs000846.v1.p1)| WGBS | pregnant/non-pregnant cfDNA|
| [Synder et al (2016)](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/pubmed/26771485) | [series_matrix](https://goo.gl/hvuGWr)   | [series_matrix](https://goo.gl/hvuGWr)     | healthy cfDNA|


### other 

#### file locations   
parallel job batch submitted to SGE using **qsub_submit.sh**  

original pipeline **/ye/zaitlenlabstore/christacaggiano/dna-me-pipeline/HAIB/bismark_pipeline** 

als files **/ye/zaitlenlabstore/christacaggiano/primary_ALS_WGBS/fastq** 

pipeline output **/ye/zaitlenlabstore/christacaggiano/primary_ALS_WGBS/FILENAME_HERE**

file key **/ye/zaitlenlabstore/christacaggiano/primary_ALS_WGBS/sample_key.txt** 

fastqc scripts **/ye/zaitlenlabstore/christacaggiano/primary_ALS_WGBS/fastqc.txt**

Commit message:

update with f-stats reference data

README.md, after:

# Guide to BS-seq Bioinformatics Workflow
## Zaitlen ALS Project Fall 2017 
## author: <christa.caggiano@ucsf.edu> 

### Whole Genome Bisulfite Sequencing (WGBS) Analysis 
------
Pipeline to process raw WGBS here is based on the WGBS pipeline from the ENCODE consortium, [found on github](https://github.com/ENCODE-DCC/dna-me-pipeline/blob/master/HAIB/bismark_pipeline/bismark_pipeline_main.sh) 

My implementation of this pipeline can be found [here](https://github.com/christacaggiano/ENCODE_WGBS) and uses the following steps: 

0. Check quality of raw fastq files with fastqc 
1. Remove adapters and trim reads
2. Align to hg38 using Bowtie2  
3. Find methylated and unmethylated sites using Bismark methylation extraction  

Output files: 
    	* aligned bams 
    	* methylation reports (command, summary of run)  
    	89* methylation extraction txt files --- used for rest of analyses

### post-analysis of WGBS data
------  

1. Pool any replicates 
2. Sort files 
3. Collapse all observations of a given CpG site 
4. For each CpG site present, calculate percent methylation, i.e. number of methylated observations/total observations

### reference datasets 
------

#### methylation chip datasets

| GEO accession | Study         | File link  | Tissue(s)  |
|---------------|---------------|------------|------------|
| [GSE40279](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE40279)| [Hannum et al (2012)](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/pubmed/23177740)| [series_matrix](https://goo.gl/CaGDpK)| whole blood|
| [GSE40360](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE40360)   | [Huynh et al (2014)](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/pubmed/24270187)| [series_matrix](https://goo.gl/vbjtji) | frontal lobe white matter|
| [GSE48472](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE48472) | [Slieker et al (2013)](https://epigeneticsandchromatin.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1756-8935-6-26#Bib1)| [series_matrix](https://goo.gl/pP4Zoc)  | various tissues| 
| [GSE62727](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE62727) | [Zhou et al (2017)](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/pubmed/28849195)| [series_matrix](https://goo.gl/ZbBykZ)  | left atrium| 
| [GSE53162](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE53162) | [Ladd-Acosta et al (2014)](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/pubmed/23999529)| [series_matrix](https://goo.gl/PJX2BB)  | prefrontal cortex| 

#### wgbs and rrbs datasets 

| Study         | File link  | Data type  | Tissue(s) | 
|---------------|------------|------------|-----------|
| [Roadmap Epigenetics Consortium (2015)](www.nature.com/nature/journal/v518/n7539/full/nature14248.html)| [Fractional methylation](http://egg2.wustl.edu/roadmap/data/byDataType/dnamethylation/RRBS/FractionalMethylation.tar.gz), [File key](http://egg2.wustl.edu/roadmap/data/byDataType/dnamethylation/RRBS/EG.mnemonics.name.xls) | RRBS | various |
| [Roadmap Epigenetics Consortium (2015)](www.nature.com/nature/journal/v518/n7539/full/nature14248.html)| [Fractional methylation](http://egg2.wustl.edu/roadmap/data/byDataType/dnamethylation/WGBS/FractionalMethylation.tar.gz), [File key](http://egg2.wustl.edu/roadmap/data/byDataType/dnamethylation/WGBS/EG.mnemonics.name.xls) | WGBS | various | 
| [Jensen et al (2015)](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-015-0645-x)| [Raw fastq files](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=phs000846.v1.p1)| WGBS | pregnant/non-pregnant cfDNA|
| [Synder et al (2016)](https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ucsf.idm.oclc.org/pubmed/26771485) | [series_matrix](https://goo.gl/hvuGWr)   | [series_matrix](https://goo.gl/hvuGWr)     | healthy cfDNA|

Reference datasets were processed as followed: 

1. Chip files were cleaned, and extraneous metadata was removed using `clean_chip_files.py` 
2. Chip files were annotated with information consistent with WGBS reference data using `annotate_cpgs.R`
		* CpG probe #'s in the chip files were annotated with their genomic location using Illumina `HumanMethylation450_15017482_v1-2.csv`
		* Chip datasets were filtered to keep only datasets immediately relevant to ALS
3. WGBS and Chip files were combined in a left outer join. i.e. Chip Cpgs were added to the appropriate DMRs taken from the Roadmap Epigenetics Consortium using `merge-those-files.py` (credit to [Arya Boudaie](https://github.com/misingnoglic) for help with a very fast algorithm to do this) 
		*Combined dataframe was cleaned, missing data was replced with Nas. 
4. Covariance and f-statistics were calculated for each CpG

### other 

#### file locations   
parallel job batch submitted to SGE using **qsub_submit.sh**  

original pipeline **/ye/zaitlenlabstore/christacaggiano/dna-me-pipeline/HAIB/bismark_pipeline** 

als files **/ye/zaitlenlabstore/christacaggiano/primary_ALS_WGBS/fastq** 

pipeline output **/ye/zaitlenlabstore/christacaggiano/primary_ALS_WGBS/FILENAME_HERE**

file key **/ye/zaitlenlabstore/christacaggiano/primary_ALS_WGBS/sample_key.txt** 

fastqc scripts **/ye/zaitlenlabstore/christacaggiano/primary_ALS_WGBS/fastqc.txt**
